The Joe Rogan experience. Um,
I want to bring it back to when you first started with the NSA,
you started as a contractor, right? Uh, what was your initial impression?
And when did you know that things were really squirrely with
the programs they were in sort of thing?
So I'm not saying this to put, put you on the spot.
I know you've been a busy guy. I know you haven't done, uh, uh,
I think shows recently you're come back from break. Right. Um,
but have you read the book because it'll just help me reframe,
if you haven't got a chance to read it, know.
No, I have not read your book or got a copy of it.
Okay. Well, I will send you a signed copy brother. Beautiful.
I hope you'll read it and I hope you enjoy it, but all right. So,
uh, I had a really weird, um, history in the intelligence community. Uh,
I grew up in a federal family, um, in the, the shadow of Fort me,
right? All these little suburban communities in Maryland,
where basically the entire industry,
the state is the federal government of all these different agencies.
And then all the subcontractors, all the defense industries, uh,
that serve that government. And really our kind of our, our war making machine,
our, our system of control, uh, for the country and the world broadly,
all that stuff spreads, uh, and you know,
a couple of hundred mile race out of DC. Uh, uh,
my mother, uh, worked for the district courts, um, or rather the federal courts.
And, uh, it's kind of funny because she still works there.
And those are the courts that are trying to throw me in jail for the rest of my
life. Now, um, my father worked for the coast guard, uh,
retired after 30 years,
my grandfather was an Admiral and then he worked for the FBI. Um,
as far back as it goes, my, my family, uh, my,
my whole line of family, even generations back, uh,
was working for the government. Um, so it was pretty ordinary,
pretty expected for me to, to, to go into the same kind of work.
Now I started now, I wasn't super successful in school,
um, because, uh, it,
I felt, and, you know,
this is the most arrogant thing in the world than anybody says. Um, uh,
that I had more to learn from computers than I did from, you know,
biology class. Um,
and so I spent more and more time focusing on technology. Then I got mano, uh,
and I dropped out of high school. Um, and now it's like,
all right, how do I make this up? Uh, I say, drop out of high school,
but I'm actually going to community college. Right.
They called it concurrent enrollment where I'm not taking any classes at high
school. Uh, I'm going to community college instead. Um,
and I'm not doing that great. They're either like, it's fine. You know,
I'm enjoying it, but you know, school is school. I, I want,
I can't wait to be grown. You're bored. Um, and
I think a lot of people, um, have, have felt that,
but I ran into somebody at the community college who ran their own home base
business, doing web design, and they could see,
I was kind of technical and they went, Hey, do you want to work for me?
And I was like, well, that sounds great. Well,
I started doing web design really, really early on. This is like, uh, gosh,
I don't know, probably a 1998, uh, vintage, um,
during the big boom. And then, uh, the collapse, the followed,
and the funny thing is she, uh, she was married, uh,
to an NSA analyst, a linguist, right. Um,
and so she lived on Fort Meade and she ran, uh,
her business out of their home, on Fort Meade.
That's right up the street from the NSA. So yeah, before I'm even working there,
uh, I'm driving past this building all the time, uh, and trying to figure out,
you know, what the next step is going to be an, I, I enjoy this. It's,
it's a good thing for me. And like, it, it works well. And I start, uh,
getting trained and certified all these little industry stamps.
You've got to get as a technologist to say, oh, you know,
this program or whatever, and just start climbing the ladder,
but then nine 11 happens. Uh, and I'm on. Yeah. Uh,
when nine 11 happens, I'm just going into work. And I tell this, uh,
the book in some detail,
and I think it's very much worth reading for people that don't know this,
because this is forgotten history. How old were you at this party? Gosh,
I was a, I was born in 83. Uh, so I was probably, yeah, 18 years old.
Um, and, uh, yeah, uh, yeah,
I had, I just turned 18 a couple months it's before. Um,
and what people forget, um,
is who knew what was going on before anybody else? Oh, on September 11th,
the intelligence community. Right. Um,
and what did they do, right. Did they, uh, give out a public morning? Did they,
they tell you guys to evacuate? Did they say do this, that or that? No. No.
I'm not for everybody. Not for long time. Uh,
but at the NSA, uh,
then director of Michael Hayden, he was a general,
he later became a director of the CIA ordered the entire campus,
evacuated of thousands.
Tens of thousands of people actually just said, go home. Right. Uh,
the CIA did the same thing. They were running on skeleton crews, uh,
at the moment the country needed them more than they ever had. Right. Uh,
and I get a call, um,
who else did I hear a call? Uh, that's from my boss's wife,
uh, her husband to her, he's calling from the NSA and saying, Hey, you know,
I think ed should leave for the day because I'm the only employee of this
business besides her. Uh,
because I think they're going to close the base down and I'm like,
this is crazy. It never closes down. We don't know what's happening.
Then we start checking the news, uh, which is through websites, right.
Because we're, we're doing all this stuff.
And suddenly it's the big story everywhere. Uh, and you know,
nobody understands how big it is yet. Um, most of us are like, oh,
it's going to mess with our Workday, oh, it's going to mess with our commute.
Uh, but when I'm leaving, I hear car horns all over the base.
It's the craziest thing. Cause this is a military base, right.
It's right outside the NSA.
And I entered just this absolute state of pandemonium is I go past canine road,
which is the road that travels right in pat in front of, uh,
the NSA's headquarters. And it's just a parking lot as far as you can see,
they have a military police out under the stoplights
directing traffic, because it's this massive evacuation.
And I still have no idea what's happening. Like the,
the story is still developing. Um,
but I will never forget that image. Uh,
why did these people have so much power and so much money and so much authority.
And then if at the moments we need them the most,
they're the first ones in the country that are leaving their buildings.
Uh, and you know, later on, um, they said, uh, and this is, uh,
covered in a book I believe. Um,
I think it's James Banford, uh,
who interviewed that director of NSA who gave that order about what was
happening. He was going well, you know, he, he, uh,
called his wife and he was asking where their kids were and everything like
that. And then after that, um, he wanted to, uh, think about, well,
where could these other planes that they knew were in the air that it hadn't
struck it? Where could they be headed? And this sort of shows how,
um, self-centric the intelligence community is, uh,
this is the DC Metro area, right? Thinking at the white house,
they could hit Congress, they could hit the Supreme court. Right. And they go,
oh, they're going to fly their planes into the CIA headquarters,
or they're going to fly their planes into the NSA headquarters. Uh,
and of course it was never realistic, uh, that these would be the targets. Um,
but on that basis, they were like, Ooh, let's get our bacon, uh, out of the pan,
but don't say this.
Yeah, I'm sorry. But in the end,
just in the interest of why wasn't it possible that they could have attacked
those places? I mean, they attack the Pentagon. They, you know,
they knew that there was.
Look it's absolutely possible. They could have attacked your Denny's. Right.
You know? Um, but it's a question of, uh, risk assessment.
If you have planes in the air, uh,
if you believe there's an ongoing terrorist attack,
that's happening in the United States right now.
And if you have built history's greatest surveillance
agencies, right? The most powerful, uh,
intelligence forces in the history of the species,
you guys are going to take those off the board,
or at least the majority of their personnel off the board,
then in a chance that you have no, uh,
sort of grounds for substantiating,
that they could be targeting you to begin with, simply because they could, well,
somebody else will do yeah. Hit with those. As you say,
it's going to be the Pentagon, right. It's going to be okay. Uh,
the world trade center, it's going to be someone somewhere.
And the more minutes you're in front of that desk, the higher the chances,
even if it's a very small chance,
even if it's somebody who doesn't work on terrorism, right.
Maybe if it's somebody who normally works finance in North Korea, right.
But they go, look, this is an emergency. Everybody understands,
you don't need to explain this. You just go stop what you're doing. Uh,
look at financial transactions related to who purchased these plane tickets,
do this. You just go full spectrum and go anything you can do right now,
if the bills, when it gets hit, we get hit. That's what we signed up for.
Nobody wants that, right. That that's not the desired outcome,
but if they had asked the staff to do,
then they all would have agreed. That's what these people signed up to do.
And yet the director goes, no, you know, we're, we're just, just no,
like we're not going to take that. And this is,
I think it's says so much about the bureaucratic character
of how government works, right?
The people who rise to the top of these governments, um,
it's about risk management for them, right?
It's about never being criticized for something, right. This is, look,
if we want to get really controversial, and this is something that'll,
that'll haunt me because people will bring it up. Uh, again and again,
and again, people ask about, you know,
people still criticize me and the book, you know,
I talk about aliens and chem trails and things like that in the fact that there,
uh, there's no evidence for that. I went looking on the network. Right. Um,
and I, I know Joe, I, I know, uh,
you want there to be aliens, uh, uh, duke,
I know Neil deGrasse Tyson badly wants there to be aliens. Uh,
and there probably are. Right. Uh, but the idea that, that we're hiding them,
if we are hiding them, I had ridiculous access to the networks of the NSA,
the CIA, the military, all of these groups. Um, I couldn't find anything. Right.
So if it's hidden and it could be hidden. Yeah. It didn't really well,
even for people who are on the inside. Um,
but the main thing is conspiracy theories, right?
Everybody wants to believe in conspiracy theories because it,
it helps life make sense.
It helps us believe that somebody has control in control, right.
That somebody is calling the shots. These things all happen for a reason, this,
that, and the other, uh, there are real conspiracies,
uh, but they're not typically, you know,
they've got tens of thousands of people working on them,
unless you're talking about the existence of the intelligence community itself,
uh, which is basically, uh, constructed on the idea that you can get. Uh,
I think there's a 4 million or 1.4 million people in the United States who
hold a security clearances, and you can get all of these people to,
to not talk ever to journalists or this, that, or the other. Um,
but when you look back at the nine 11 report,
and when you look back at the history of what actually happened,
what we can prove, right. Not what we can speculate on,
but what are at least the commonly agreed facts, right?
It's very clear to me as someone who worked in the intelligence community,
not during this period, of course I was too young, uh,
but very shortly thereafter, um,
that these attacks could have been prevented. Uh, and in fact,
the government says this too. Uh, but the government goes to the,
the reason that they, uh, these attacks happened,
the reason that they weren't prevented, uh, is, uh,
with a cold stove piping, right? There was, there was not enough, uh, sharing.
They needed to break down the walls and the restrictions that were chaining,
these poor Patriots, uh,
at the NSA and the CIA and the FBI from all working on the same team.
And to some extent, they're, they're correct on this right there,
there were limits on the way agencies were supposed to play ball with each
other. Um,
but I worked there and I know how much of this is and how much of this is not,
um, those are, uh, procedural and policy limits in some cases,
legal limits on what can be shared, uh,
without following a process without doing this, that, or the other without, uh,
basically asking for permission without getting a sign off, uh,
or anything like that.
If the FBI wanted to send absolutely everything they had to the CIA they could
have done. So if the CIA wanted to send everything they had to, the FBI,
they could have done. So they didn't, and people died as a result.
Now government goes, bureaucratic procedural realism, uh, was responsible.
And it's because we had too many restrictions on the intelligence community.
And this is what led to the world. Post nine 11,
where all of our rights sort of evaporated was they went well,
restrictions on what these agencies can do are costing lives. Therefore,
naturally we just have to Unchained these guys and everything will be better.
Right? And if you remember that post nine 11 moment,
you can understand how that actually could come off as persuasive,
how that might be a kind of thing to go. You go, all right, well,
will that make sense? Because everybody was terrified, right? Um,
there were people quite quickly who got their heads back on their shoulders,
the right way. There were some of them who never lost their heads at all. Uh,
and who protested the Iraq war at the same time,
my Don self was signing up to go fight it, uh, volunteering for the army.
And we're getting into that a minute. Um, but
everything is that his followed in the decades past,
came from the fact that in a of fear,
we lost our heads and we abandoned all the traditional
constitutional restraints that we put on these agencies.
And we abandoned all of the traditional, uh,
political restraints and just social constraints, idiot, logical, uh,
systems of belief about them limitations that the secret police should have in a
free and open society. And we went, look, you know, terrorists,
we created shows like 24 and Jack Bauer where he's like threatening knife.
People's eyeballs out if they won't tell him this, that or the other. Uh,
and we entered it this era of increasingly unlimited government as a
result. And now in hindsight, we go, well, we should have been surprised. Uh,
but at the time, uh, everyone panicked, right.
But if you go back to you did that help. And we know the answer now is in fact,
no, it did not. It made things worse. Uh, I don't think any of that,
the story is going to look at the Bush administration and go this improve the
position of the United States, it's in the world. Um,
but if you go back, you don't wind back the tape to that pre nine 11 moment,
uh,
wind back the tape to those silos and those walls that they said needed to come
down, because that was restraining government, instead of the rules that said,
well, you can share these things, but there's gotta be basis.
There's gotta be a justification. You've gotta go.
Why are we trading people's information like baseball cards and all of this
stuff.
It's super easy as an intelligence officer to justify
sharing information about a suspected terrorist,
who do you think is planning to kill people, or is even just in a country,
they shouldn't be replaced. They shouldn't be,
you're doing something you don't think they should be with another agency
because no, one's going to question that a judge,
isn't going to question that any judge in the world will stamp that warrant
without even thinking about it and then go to bed that night. Um, uh, you know,
without a care in the world, uh, because you're not spying on a journalist,
you're not spying on the human rights defender, right? This is not an edge case.
Uh, this is someone that you believe to be associated with Al Qaeda or whatever.
Now, uh, this is all a lot of preamble to say that essential fact,
um, government agrees, everyone agrees.
The tax probably could have been prevented, uh, if information had and shared.
So why wasn't the information shared government says no
information wasn't shared, um,
because of these restrictions and it's half true because every important lie
has, has some criminal truth to it. Uh, and, and there were these barriers,
but the reality is why were those barriers respected in the case of a major
terrorist plot? Why wasn't the CIA sharing information with the FBI?
Why wasn't the FBI sharing information with the NSA?
Why was the NSA sharing information with the CIA in the case of Mary major
terrorist plot? And if you've worked in government,
if you've worked in the trust Allison's community,
if you work in any large institution, you know,
you work at a company that sells batteries. You know,
that every office is fighting the other office for budget,
for cloud, for promotions.
And this is the sad reality of what actually happened. Um,
every one of those agencies want it to be the guy who busted the plot.
They wanted to be the one who got credit for it,
and they didn't realize how serious it was until it was too late,
because they were competing with each other rather than co-op.
That's exactly what I was going to ask you, if that was the issue,
the competition between these agencies, because they,
they are very proud of the CIA accomplishing something or the FBI
accomplishing something and they,
they want to be the one to take credit for that.
Yeah. And I mean, I think it's important like in their defense,
because nobody else here is going to provide a defense for them. Um,
is that that's actually a darkly, uh, human. Uh,
again, this happens in every industry. This happens in every, uh,
sort of big corporate thing because you want to get promoted and, you know,
everybody's putting in their like achievements at the end of the year for what
they did. And if you're the guy who does that, you're going straight to the top,
but there's solutions was the, the.
So we, we have a weird delay here for folks that are listening.
So their solution,
instead of having someone be responsible for bridging the gap and providing that
information to each individual agency, their solution was mass surveillance.
Well, no, they're, they're, they're different things. This is, uh,
nine 11 is what woke these guys up, right. Um, basically, and they,
they went well, we screwed up and Americans died as a result.
Um, we really don't want to take the hit on that. Um, and to be honest,
the government had no interest in putting the hit on them. Uh, to be honest,
the public had no interest in putting the hit on them, uh, at the time.
Um, because everybody understood terrorism is a real thing.
There are bad people in the world, and that's true, right?
That will always be true. There's always going to be criminals.
There's always going to be terrorists. Uh, whether they're at your church,
whether they're across the ocean, there are people out there who are angry,
they're disenfranchised, they're violent,
and they just want to harm something.
They want to change something even in a negative way, uh,
because that's what they feel is all they have left,
which these are criminals, right? These are people that we don't need to pity.
Uh, but if we ever want to stop it, we do need to understand it.
And where those things come from, where there's,
these drives come from in the first place. But, uh, eh,
basically everybody went, all right, how do we stop this?
Because nobody wants to feel unsafe.
Nobody wants to feel like the buildings is going to come down.
Then the next time you go in it. And so everybody just went, um, I don't care.
Who does it stop it? And they said this to Dick Cheney,
which is a historic mistake because Dane,
Dick Cheney knows how government works. Uh, he was, uh,
the person in that white house who was best placed to know all the levers of
government, all the inter-agency cooperation, where we were strong,
where we're weak, what we could do, what we were not allowed to do.
And what he did was he took that little dial on what we're not allowed to do.
And he changed it all the way until it broke and snapped off.
And then there was nothing that was, he couldn't do anymore. Um.
And you were there when this was happening. This was no.
I was, I, I was not, uh, again, this is, uh, 2001.
Um, I was, uh, I was 18 years old. I was working on the base.
I had drove past the building, but that was it. This is all hindsight.
This is biography. This is documented history, but this is not, you know,
the gospel of Edward Snowden. I don't know this, right. This is public record.
This is what we all know. Um,
what we have though, uh,
the reason that I bring this up is this is a teachable moment because there's so
many people right now in the Trump administration, uh, who go look,
this guy has too much power. Uh, he's abusing it against immigrants.
He's abusing it against domestic opponents.
He's doing whatever he's trying to hurt political rivals in the next election,
all of this stuff. And, you know, we can get into this stuff later if you want,
uh, in detail. But the bottom line is they're going, this is a guy, uh,
who's in the white house, who's throwing elbows, right? He doesn't really care.
He wants to hurt people as long as he can convince the Americans that those
are the bad guys, right? That's the enemy.
It doesn't matter if they're far away.
It doesn't matter if they're close at home, um, whoever he's against,
he's gonna harm.
And the dark thing is this is actually why he was elected,
um, in moments of fear where the world starts falling apart.
And this happens in authoritarian country after country. Uh,
this is why you have Latimer Putin in Russia.
Who's been there for 20 years, right?
Present for basically 20 years. Think about that. Uh, you know,
he sort of skipped in the middle there, uh, because he had to Dodge,
the fact that presidents can only serve so many consecutive terms.
So he dropped down to prime minister and they came back as president.
But I think about that. How do you get that kind of political LUNGevity?
And it's because if you know anything about Russian history, which, you know,
even, I don't know that much about it.
The nineties after the collapse of the Soviet union were an extraordinarily dark
time. If you look at Russian cinema, all they had were gangster movies, right?
All they had were the disintegration of society, how things are dark and broken,
no one trusts. Each other pensions were no longer being paid.
Social security is not there anymore. Like there's nothing to buy.
There's nothing to do. There's no job, no one had a future. And so they went,
if there's somebody who can lead us out of this,
if there's somebody who will fix this,
who will find us an enemy and defeat that enemy to restore prosperity,
we'll put them in office. We see it happen in Turkey with Irvine, right? Uh,
we've seen it happen, uh, successively with bad governments, even in Western,
uh, democracies. We see it happening sadly, um,
in places like Poland and Hungary, uh, you can even argue it's happening, uh,
in the United Kingdom, right? And now there are a lot of people arguing.
That's exactly what we're seeing with Donald Trump's white house, uh,
in the United States.
And this is the lesson that we didn't learn from 2001
is when we become fearful, we become vulnerable, right?
Uh, to anyone who promises, they will make things better.
Even if they have no ability to make things better,
even if they will actively make things worse,
even if they will make things better for themselves and their bodies by taking
from you.
But if they tell you that they'll make things better and you believe them
in a moment of fear, uh, that that typically leads to unfortunate outcomes. So,
sorry, let me,
let me turn this back over to you because we got way off track there. No,
that's all right.